so what we're talking about today is
isolating parts of a
muscle get this topic all the time uh I
understand where it came from I
understand why this is a thing that
people talk about and I'm going to
explain why it's not a thing um I'm sure
I will upset many individuals who have
based their life off of training people
uh to isolate parts of a muscle but you
know sorry it's not a thing
so uh speaking of upsetting people uh
last night's post that I made on
Instagram and and on Facebook was about
uh
pull-ups and I'll get to this first
because it actually dovetails right into
this
conversation uh hey Paul how you doing
uh David fish is on too awesome hey
David uh so when when we talk about
pull-ups and the research shows that
there's there's more damage in the
shoulder joint with pull-ups than than
there are with rows now keep in mind how
research works also Zach Salazar had a
lot of problems with what I said and
he's a really smart dude so I really
want to explain from his perspective uh
like really why I
believe this is a is a is a problem so
um when a study is done and this is
something about scientific studies where
like sometimes like the Press will run
away with like the wrong idea of what a
study found or they'll look at some
piece of data in the study and not
really fully understand the conclusion
or maybe not want to understand the
conclusion and kind of intentionally
misread it
so
uh when a study happens what they do is
they take one group and they do one
thing they take another group and they
do another thing and then they compare
the data what were the outcomes so they
have a group of people who they have
consistently doing one or the other you
know one thing and they have another
group doing the other things so one
group were doing bend over rows another
group doing uh pull-ups and who had more
inflammation in the
joint
often we don't have or let's say there's
no biomechanics Specialist or let's say
these individuals are unsupervised in
study and they go and off and they do
their own thing well here's the problem
when you do a
pullup so uh if I were to do a pullup I
would be about right here at the top
position the problem is like when you
lock out what happens is you have the
opportunity to pull your shoulder back
and and sometimes people Ki so they Rock
their body forward and then use the
momentum to balce off kind of the
tendons and ligaments in here and pull
themselves back up and the swing of
their body to get them moved forward so
they just kind of pop back into position
well your tenons and ligaments are not
rubber bands uh they're tissue that you
need functioning for the rest of your
life and also keep in mind this joint
right here this has the greatest range
of motion of any joint in the human
body
so don't [__]
up you you really you really have a lot
of opportunities to scow up your
shoulder in your life and uh so what I'm
trying to do is encourage people to go
the lower Risk Road and still get the
same or even greater gains and so when I
recommend the Ben over row or when
somebody says hey should I throw in
pull-ups and I go yeah yeah pull-ups are
okay but what you want to make
sure is that you're doing something that
is going to have the greatest reward and
the lowest
risk so you can apply the same thing to
investing right so you you anything you
do in life it's like you want a very
high reward and a very low risk so uh
when you de B over a row especially with
variable resistance with X3 you're
exhausting different ranges of motion as
you go through the diminishing range of
the protocol and thereby stimulate a
greater amount of muscular
growth uh now I believe that
relatively uh uh
exhausts the questions on this I will go
back to questions afterward I saw you I
saw you guys were smiling about
something did I miss a good question is
there is there a question no no Keith
Keith says nice work on this topic oh
thanks ke uh so let's talk
about the falsehood of Fitness of
isolating a a part of a muscle so I'm
going to go with an obvious outrageous
example first and then I'm going to talk
about one that almost everybody seems to
be a fan of and then I'm going to talk
about the clinical research on the
subject so all the time we hear people
talking about how uh let's say one
particular physique star athlete will
have like an incredibly tall Peak on
their on their Bice right you know
you'll see them do that and it's just
like wow they have a really tall Peak
and then so they're like hey I'm going
to write a program see the people on
Instagram they can see yeah uh
so so what what the the the question is
somebody has an amazing bicep and they
say well here's my routine here's how I
did it and people think okay so what
this guy did is how to build a bicep of
that
shape and so like Robbie Robinson for
example was a bodybuilder in like the I
think like even 60s 70s and 80s
uh he's still in shape animal awesome
guy uh and a cool guy I met him uh so
what he would talk about is like outward
rotation while he does bicep
work and that's how you build the peak
because it really focuses on the outer
head and having some training in in
physiology and biomechanics like your
bicep
shortens like a muscle shortens that
muscle is shortening and it's doing so
in a way that your body recognizes
especially in a multi-joint
format or a stabilization in single
joint format like like if you're act
activating your biceps via a bicep curl
like there's all kinds of stabilization
going on you do pick up things with your
bicep in a single joint Manner and have
stabilization going through your whole
body to attenuate the forward the
sagittal abrupt loading and so there's
all kinds of uh effect there and and
that hence the growth hormone effect
that we've seen okay so what would
happen was that Robbie
Robinson would uh he had amazing biceps
and so people wanted to know what his
bicep routine was but here's the problem
with that is the shape of a muscle is
like your fingerprint right thumb print
it's it was that way always so because
the guy had an amazing shape of
bicep uh whatever he did to make the
muscle larger made it seem like he did
that so that his bicep would grow in a
certain shape and the same thing with
Arnold schwarzeneger how many probably
millions of people follow Arnold
Schwarzenegger's program because he had
a bicep which looked like you know like
an apple like the tendon was over here
and it was really tall so you would just
go oh like whatever he did like shaped
it like that no no no he was born of
that and a monument to this is there's
like a lot of people who tried to
replicate that shape and they weren't
born with a bicep of that shape they
didn't get that now here's another
example when people who have big
separation from upper to lower
pectorals uh some people do and some
people don't uh they end up writing a
program about separating your upper
upper pectorals except you can't that's
not how the muscle fires so here's a
great study uh and very strong evidence
now I've said before electron myography
is not everything but it does show
activity so the idea that you can
isolate a part of a muscle this is where
an electron myography would be good test
so we would
see based on how much of a part of a
muscle is Contracting so if we can do an
exercise like an incline bench press so
you know you're pushing upward So you
you're or or or downward for a decline
or or for like a straight bar you're
you're maybe getting a balance of both
so they tested these different
protocols with bench
press with uh 15 young men and uh who
were doing repetitions and they put
electrodes all over the
pictoral and what they tried to do is
they did an incline and a
decline because what had been said was a
decline is more for lower pectorals and
the incline is more for upper pectorals
now by the way this came out in
1997 and this has been like a standard
thing this is a very famous study by
Steven glass and Tai Armstrong uh two
researchers
and it was published in the uh National
strength conditioning Association
journal the Journal of strength and
conditioning research so top World
Journal great paper went through peer
review and uh and so what they
discovered was there was no significant
difference in
activity between upper and lower pecs no
matter what they
did so hence this is a false set of
fitness and this [__] just doesn't seem
to want to go away uh because I I like
I've tried to tell people this like you
can't isolate a part of a muscle and I
think people just don't like that answer
and so we're all victims at times of
confirmation bias just look at how
people like research political issues
they search for something that will give
them the answer they want not the answer
that
is so when somebody says I want to grow
my upper pectorals there are trainers
out there who truly believe they're
helping people develop their upper
pectorals and so here's one thing to
point out if if if I push down and I
looked at like what my pectoral looks
like it looks thicker on the bottom and
if I push up like this it looks like my
pectoral is thicker at the top so it
looks like it's more
contracted but it isn't like these
things shorten and the one of the most
ludicrous things I've seen recently is
building the inner
pectoral which is you
know not a thing I mean that's not even
muscle it's connective tissue like it's
it's where where the muscle comes into
the sternum so just that's not a thing
now if you do make your pectorals bigger
you will have a thicker inner chest but
you'll have a thicker chest and whatever
shape what you were born with like your
thumb print is how it's going to look
now some people
have no idea what the shape of their
muscle is if they're carrying around a
significant amount of body fat and they
have an underdeveloped muscle under
there so you know what what are you
going to look like when you're totally
lean well there's only one one way to
find out and that's get totally
lean so uh fantastic study again uh
glass and Armstrong 1997 Journal of
strength and conditioning research and I
said I would only bore you guys with one
uh uh reference
one piece of academic research per one
of these videos and I did that uh let's
open it up for questions